# Sensitivity tiers

Our recommendation for secure information processing tiers is based on work which has gone before. We have begun with the UK government classifications, and reconciled these to the definitions of personal data, whether or not something is 'special category' under the GDPR or relates to criminal convictions, and related them to common activities in the research community.

Where input datasets contain personal data, consideration should always be given at the outset to minimising the personal data, including by pseudonymisation or anonymisation.

**Pseudonymised data** is still personal data, as it can be re-identified by those who hold the key to turn pseudonyms back into individual identifiers. This may include synthetic data derived from personal data, or models trained on personal data, depending on the methods used to synthesise the data or generate the models.

**Anonymised data**, including pseudonymised data where that key is destroyed, is not personal data when it is impossible to re-identify any living individuals from it. However, if the quality of anonymisation is ambiguous or if individuals can be identified when the anonymised data is combined with another dataset, such data would by definition not be anonymised, and would therefore be personal data. The question as to whether re-identification is possible or not is a very subtle one, and the assessment of this risk is critical to the assignment of security tiers.

We emphasise that this classification is based on considering the sensitivity of all information handled in the project, including information that may be generated by combining or processing input datasets. In every case, the categorisation does not depend only on the input datasets, but on combining information with other information or generated results in a work package.

Derived information may be of higher security tier than the information in the input datasets. (For example, information on the identities of those who are suspected to possess an undiagnosed neurological condition on the basis of analysis of public social media data.) This should form part of the information constituting a work package; when a project team believes this will be the case, the work package should be classified at the higher tier of secure Environment.

If it becomes apparent during the project that intended analysis will produce this effect then the inputs should be treated as a new work package with this extra information, and classified afresh, following the full classification process below.
In the below, "personal data" follows the GDPR definition: information from which a living individual is identified or identifiable. It excludes information about individuals who are dead.

## Tier 0

Tier 0 Environments are used to handle open information, which is legally available to the general public with no restrictions, where all generated and combined information is also suitable for open handling.

Tier 0 applies where none of the information processed, combined or generated includes personal data, commercially sensitive data, or data which will have legal, political or reputational consequences in the event of unauthorised disclosure.

Tier 0 environments may be used for anonymised or synthetic information generated from personal data, where one has **absolute** confidence in the quality of anonymisation or the privacy preserving nature of the data synthesis. This makes the information no longer personal data. This does **not** include pseudonymised data which can be re-identified in combination with a key or other dataset. This is still considered personal data.

Note that in practice it is extremely difficult (if not impossible) to guarantee that data is truly anonymous, especially when considering the risk of the anonymised data being linked with other datasets that currently exist or may exist in the future, and the potential development of more sophisticated re-identification attacks.

If there is not **absolute** confidence in the anonymous or synthetic data no longer being personal data, then the minimum tier environment this data can be processed in is Tier 2.

Tier 0 data should be considered ready for publication. Although this data is open, there are still advantages to handling it through a managed data analysis infrastructure.

Management of Tier 0 data in a visible, well ordered infrastructure provides confidence to stakeholders as to the handling of more sensitive datasets.

Although analysis may take place on personal devices or in non-managed cloud-based analysis Environments, the data should still therefore be listed through the inventory and curatorial systems of a managed research data Environment.

Finally, audit trails as to the handling of Tier 0 information reduce risks associated with misclassification - if data is mistakenly classified as a lower tier than it should be, we still retain information as to how it was processed during the period of misclassification.

## Tier 1

Tier 1 Environments are used to handle, process and generate data that is intended for eventual publication or that could be published without reputational damage.

Information is kept private in order to give the research team a competitive advantage, not due to legal data protection requirements.

Both the datasets and the proposed processing must otherwise meet the criteria for Tier 0.

It may be used for pseudonymised or synthetic information generated from personal data, where one has **absolute** confidence that the personal data cannot be re-identified.

It may also be used for commercial data where commercial consequences of disclosure would be no impact or very low impact, with the agreement of all parties.

### Relationships to other classification schemes

Pseudonymised data is considered [Personal Data](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/key-definitions/what-is-personal-data/) under the GDPR. Anonymised data is not considered Personal Data under the GDPR, but in practice it is extremely difficult (if not impossible) to guarantee that data is truly anonymous. Therefore, unless we are **absolutely** confident in the anonymisation process, we consider all data related to living individuals as Personal Data under the GDPR and therefore at least Tier 2.

In particular, Tier 1 is not suitable for any data derived from personal data that is not otherwise suitable for processing in Tier 0. If this is not the case, then the minimum tier environment such data can be processed in is Tier 2.

## Tier 2

Tier 2 Environments are used to handle, combine or generate information which is not linked to identifiable personal data.

It may be used for pseudonymised, synthetic or anonymised information generated from personal data, where we have strong, but not absolute, confidence that the personal data cannot be re-identified. This assessment should consider the risk of processing the data in a manner that permits personal data to be re-identified, including by combining it with other data available within the environment.

The pseudonymisation, synthesis or anonymisation process itself, if carried out in the Turing, should take place in a Tier 3 Environment.
A typical model for a project will be to instantiate both Tier 2 and Tier 3 Environments, with pseudonymised, synthetic or anonymised data generated in the Tier 3 Environment and then transferred to the Tier 2 Environment.

Tier 2 Environments are also used to handle, combine or generate information which is confidential but not, in commercial or national security terms, sensitive.
This includes commercial-in-confidence datasets or intellectual property where the legal, commercial, political and reputational consequences from disclosure are low.
Where such consequences are not low, Tier 3 should be used.

At Tier 2, the most significant risks are "workaround breach" and the risk of mistakenly believing data is robustly pseudonymised or anonymised, when in fact re-identification might be possible.

### Relationships to other classification schemes

Almost all data at the baseline UK government OFFICIAL classification is likely to be Tier 2, as well as a large proportion of data at the OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE [COMMERCIAL] classification.

All pseudonymised [Personal Data](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/key-definitions/what-is-personal-data/) under the GDPR that is not [Special Category Personal Data](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/lawful-basis-for-processing/special-category-data/) is Tier 2. Note that pseudonymised data is Personal Data under the GDPR. While anonymised data is not considered Personal Data under the GDPR, in practice it is extremely difficult (if not impossible) to guarantee that data is truly anonymous. Therefore, unless we are **absolutely** confident in the anonymisation process, we consider all data related to living individuals as Personal Data under the GDPR.

## Tier 3

Tier 3 Environments are used to handle, combine or generate personal data, excluding personal data where there is a risk that disclosure might pose a substantial threat to the personal safety, health or security of the data subjects (which would be Tier 4).

This also includes pseudonymised, synthetic or anonymised information generated from personal data, where we have only weak confidence that the personal data cannot be re-identified.

Tier 3 Environments are also used to handle, combine or generate information, including intellectual property, which is sensitive in commercial, legal, political, or national security terms.
This tier anticipates the need to defend against compromise by attackers with bounded capabilities and resources.
This may include hacktivists, single-issue pressure groups, investigative journalists, competent individual hackers and the majority of criminal individuals and groups.
The threat profile excludes sophisticated, well-resourced and determined threat actors, such as highly capable serious organised crime groups and state actors.

The difference between Tier 2 and Tier 3 Environments is the most significant in this model, both for researcher productivity and organisational risk.

At Tier 3, the risk of hostile actors attempting to break into the Environment becomes significant.

### Relationships to other classification schemes

All data at the UK government OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE [PERSONAL] classification will be Tier 3, as well as some data at the OFFICIAL-SENSITIVE [COMMERCIAL] classification, where the consequence of disclosure are particularly high.

All pseudonymised [Special Category Personal Data](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/lawful-basis-for-processing/special-category-data/) under the GDPR is Tier 3.

All non-pseudonymised [Personal Data](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/key-definitions/what-is-personal-data/) under the GDPR, whether or not it is [Special Category Personal Data](https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/lawful-basis-for-processing/special-category-data/) is Tier 3.

## Tier 4

Tier 4 Environments are used to handle, combine or generate personal data where disclosure poses a substantial threat to the personal safety, health or security of the data subjects.

This also includes handling, combining or generating datasets which are sensitive in commercial or national security terms, and are likely to be subject to attack by sophisticated, well-resourced and determined actors, such as serious organised crime groups and state actors.

It is at Tier 4 that the risk of hostile actors penetrating the project team becomes significant.

### Relationships to other classification schemes

All data at the UK government SECRET classification will be Tier 4.
