# Tier1 Secure Research Environment Build Instructions

> :warning: This document provides instructions for deploying a Tier 1 environment **only**.
> If you want to deploy any other tier, please follow [these instructions](./deploy_sre_instructions.md) instead.

> :warning: This documentation is temporary pending the integration of Tier 1 environments with AD


## Contents
- [:seedling: Prerequisites](#seedling-prerequisites)
- [:clipboard: Define SRE Configuration](#clipboard-define-sre-configuration)
- [:registered: Deploy Key Vault](#registered-deploy-key-vault)
- [:bicyclist: Optional: Declare Users](#bicyclist-optional-declare-users)
- [:computer: Deploy and Configure VM](#computer-deploy,-and-configure-vm)
- [:floppy_disk: Uploading Data](#floppy_disk-uploading-data)


## :seedling: Prerequisites
:warning: As the deployment process depends on [`Ansible`](https://www.ansible.com) you must be on a [system supported by ansible](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_installation.html) (Linux, OSX, BSD, Solaris).

The following packages are required
  - `PowerShell` with support for Azure
    - Install [PowerShell v6.0 or above](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell)
    - Install the [Azure Powershell module](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/azure/install-az-ps)
  - `Ansible` (not currently supported on Windows)
    - Install [Ansible](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_installation.html)
  - `Python`
    - Install a version `> 3.6`
  - `qrencode`
    - :apple: Install using [Homebrew](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/qrencode) on OSX
    - :penguin: Install through your package manager on Linux
  - `oathtool`
    - :apple: Install `oath-toolkit` using [Homebrew](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/oath-toolkit) on OSX
    - :penguin: Install through your package manager on Linux
  - `ssh-keygen`
    - Should be available out-of-the-box for all systems supported by Ansible


## :clipboard: Define SRE configuration
The full configuration details for a new SRE are generated by defining a few "core" properties for the new SRE and the management environment in which it will be deployed.

### :green_apple: Generate SRE Configuration
Follow the steps [here](./deploy_sre_instructions.md#clipboard-define-sre-configuration) to declare the SHM and SRE configuration properties and generate the full SRE configuration.

> :warning: It is **not** necessary to attach this SRE to an SHM. However, to generate the SRE configuration an existing SHM configuration must be included in the core config file; user accounts should not be created in the SHM as they will not be used.


## :registered: Deploy Key Vault
On your **deployment machine**.
- Create a key vault in the SRE subscription by running `./Setup_SRE_KeyVault_And_Users.ps1 -configId <SRE config ID>`, where the `<SRE config ID>` is `<SHM ID><SRE ID>` for the full config file you are using.
  For example, the full config file `sre_testcsandbox_full_config` will have `<SRE config ID>` equal to `testcsandbox`.


## :clubs: Create SRE DNS Zone
- Follow the steps [here](./deploy_sre_instructions.md#clubs-create-sre-dns-zone) to deploy a DNS zone for this SRE.


## :bicyclist: [Optional] Declare Users
This step is optional at deploy time - if no users are declared, none will be created and they can be added at a later time.

On your **deployment machine**.
- The users file is a [YAML](https://yaml.org) file. There is one top-level key `users` which contains a list of users.
- Each users has
  - Real name
  - Username
  - Path to their public SSH key
  - Admin flag (if true can use sudo)
  - Enabled flag (if true can login)
- Here is an example users file

```yaml
---
users:
  - name: Harry Lime
    username: harry
    keyfile: keys/id_harry_rsa.pub
    admin: false
    enabled: true
  - name: Keyser Soze
    username: keyser
    keyfile: ~/.ssh/id_keyser_rsa.pub
    admin: true
    enabled: false
```


## :computer: Deploy and Configure VM
On your **deployment machine**.
- Deploy a Tier 1 VM by running `./Setup_SRE_Tier1.ps1 -configId <SRE config ID>` where the config ID is `<SHM ID><SRE ID>` for the config file you are using.
  - If you have a users file pass its path with the `-usersYAMLPath` argument.
    If not a VM with no additional user accounts will be created and you may add users later.
- If you have not connected to the VM before, this script will ask you if you want to connect as the authenticity of the host cannot be established.
  At this point enter `yes`.
- If you are creating new TOTP hashes for new users there are **expected failures** in the Ansible play.
  In particular, looking up the existing TOTP hashes for these users will fail.
  This is expected and not a problem as it prompts the next task to create a TOTP hash for those users.
- The CoCalc container is large and pulling it may take some time (~20 minutes).
- To add, or disable user accounts, edit the users file and re-run `./Setup_SRE_Tier1.ps1 -usersYAMLPath <YAML file>`.


## :closed_lock_with_key: Generate SSL certificate
- Follow the steps [here](./deploy_sre_instructions.md#closed_lock_with_key-update-ssl-certificate) to generate an SSL certificate for the SRE domain


## :lock: Apply Network Configuration
- Follow the steps [here](./deploy_sre_instructions.md#lock-apply-network-configuration) to apply the network configuration.
- This may be used to restrict SSH access to particular IP addresses.


## :floppy_disk: Uploading Data
- `./Setup_SRE_Tier1.ps1` creates a storage account named `sre<SRE id>ingress<random string>` where `<SRE id>` is the SRE ID in lower case and `<random string>` is a random set of lower case characters unique to the SRE.
- Within that storage account is a file share called `ingress`.
  This share is mounted at `/data` on the Tier 1 VM.
- You may upload data to `ingress` using the [Azure Storage Explorer](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/features/storage-explorer/).
- If data is already in another Azure storage account, the easiest way to transfer it is using [`AzCopy`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/learn/modules/copy-blobs-from-command-line-and-code/5-move-blobs-using-azcopy)

## :chart_with_upwards_trend: Migrating to a GPU VM
- Stop the existing compute VM in the Azure Portal. This VM will be found in the
  resource group `RG_SRE_<SRE ID>_COMPUTE`.
- Change the size of the compute VM to a suitable size with a GPU, e.g. NC6.
- Start the compute VM in the Azure Portal.
- Ensure you have the `774-tier1-cuda` branch checked out.
- Run `Setup_SRE_Tier1.ps1 -configId <SRE config ID> -usersYAMLPath <YAML file>` where the config ID is `<SHM ID><SRE ID>` for the config file you are using and `<YAML file>` is the path to the YAML file declaring the users.
